Administration of Barack Obama, 2011
Address Before a Joint Session of th
e Congress on the State of the Union
January 25, 2011
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of
Congress, distinguished guests, and fellow
Americans: Tonight I want to begin by co
ngratulating the men and women of the 112th
Congress, as well as your new Speaker, John Boehner. And as we mark this occasion, we're also
mindful of the empty chair in this Chamber, and we pray for the health of our colleague and
our friend Gabby Giffords.
It's no secret that those of us here tonight have had our differences over the last 2 years.
The debates have been contentious; we have foug
ht fiercely for our beliefs. And that's a good
thing. That's what a robust democracy demands.
That's what helps set us apart as a nation.
But there's a reason the tragedy in Tucson g
ave us pause. Amid all the noise and passion
and rancor of our public debate, Tucson reminded us that no matter who we are or where we
come from, each of us is a part of something
greater, something more consequential than party
or political preference.
We are part of the American family. We beli
eve that in a country where every race and
faith and point of view can be found, we are st
ill bound together as one people, that we share
common hopes and a common creed, that the drea
ms of a little girl in Tucson are not so
different than those of our own children, that they all deserve the
chance to be fulfilled. That
too is what sets us apart as a nation.
Now, by itself, this simple recognition won'
t usher in a new era of cooperation. What
comes of this moment is up to us. What come
s of this moment will be determined not by
whether we can sit together tonight, but
whether we can work together tomorrow.
I believe we can, and I believe we must. That's what the people who sent us here expect of
us. With their votes, they've de
termined that governing will no
w be a shared responsibility
between parties. New laws will only pass with support from Democrats and Republicans. We
will move forward together or not
at all, for the challenges we face are bigger than party and
bigger than politics.
At stake right now is not who wins the next elec
tion. After all, we just
had an election. At
stake is whether new jobs and industries take r
oot in this country or somewhere else. It's
whether the hard work and industry of our peop
le is rewarded. It's whether we sustain the
leadership that has made America not just a
place on a map, but the light to the world.
We are poised for progress. Two years after
the worst recession most of us have ever
known, the stock market has come roaring back, corporate profits are up, the economy is
growing again.
But we have never measured progress by these yardsticks alone. We measure progress by
the success of our people, by the jobs they can fi
nd and the quality of life those jobs offer, by
the prospects of a small-business owner who drea
ms of turning a good idea into a thriving
enterprise, by the opportunities for a bette
r life that we pass on to our children.
That's the project the American peop
le want us to work on—together.
1
Now, we did that in December. Thanks to the tax cuts we passed, Americans' paychecks
are a little bigger today. Every business can write
off the full cost of new investments that they
make this year. And these steps, taken by Demo
crats and Republicans, will grow the economy
and add to the more than 1 million pr
ivate sector jobs created last year.
But we have to do more. These steps we've ta
ken over the last 2 years may have broken
the back of this recession, but to win the future
, we'll need to take on challenges that have
been decades in the making.
Many people watching tonight can probably remember a time when finding a good job
meant showing up at a nearby factory or a bus
iness downtown. You didn't always need a
degree, and your competition was pretty much li
mited to your neighbors. If you worked hard,
chances are you'd have a job for life, with a decent paycheck and good benefits and the
occasional promotion. Maybe you'd even have the
pride of seeing your kids work at the same
company.
That world has changed. And for many, the change has been painful. I've seen it in the
shuttered windows of once booming factories a
nd the vacant storefronts on once busy Main
Streets. I've heard it in the frustrations of
Americans who've seen their paychecks dwindle or
their jobs disappear, proud men and women who feel like the rules have been changed in the
middle of the game.
They're right. The rules have changed. In a si
ngle generation, revolutions in technology
have transformed the way we live, work, and do business. Steel mills that once needed 1,000
workers can now do the same work with 100. To
day, just about any company can set up shop,
hire workers, and sell their products wh
erever there's an Internet connection.
Meanwhile, nations like China and India realiz
ed that with some changes of their own,
they could compete in this new world. And so th
ey started educating thei
r children earlier and
longer, with greater emphasis on math and scie
nce. They're investing in research and new
technologies. Just recently, China became the
home to the world's
largest private solar
research facility and the
world's fastest computer.
So yes, the world is changed. The competit
ion for jobs is real. But this shouldn't
discourage us. It should challenge us. Remember, for all the hits we've taken these last few
years, for all the naysayers predicting our decline,
America still has the la
rgest, most prosperous
economy in the world. No workers are more productive than ours. No country has more
successful companies or grants more patents to
inventors and entrepreneurs. We're the home
to the world's best colleges and universities, wh
ere more students come to study than any place
on Earth.
What's more, we are the first nation to be
founded for the sake of an idea: the idea that
each of us deserves the chance to shape our own destiny. That's why centuries of pioneers and
immigrants have risked everything to come he
re. It's why our students don't just memorize
equations, but answer questions like "What do
you think of that idea? What would you change
about the world? What do you want to be when you grow up?"
The future is ours to win. But to get there,
we can't just stand still. As Robert Kennedy
told us, "The future is not a gift. It is an
achievement." Sustaining the American Dream has
never been about standing pat. It has required
each generation to s
acrifice and struggle and
meet the demands of a new age.
2
